The Avengers are a fictional team of superheroes and the protagonists of the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) media franchise, 
based on the Marvel Comics team of the same name created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby. Founded by S.H.I.E.L.D Director Nick Fury, 
the team is a United States-based organization composed of enhanced and gifted individuals committed to the world's protection 
from a variety of threats. The Avengers are depicted as operating in the state of New York; originally operating from the Avengers 
Tower in Midtown Manhattan and subsequently from the Avengers Compound in Upstate New York. The concept of the Avengers 
was teased in the post-credits scene of Iron Man, the first MCU film, by Nick Fury as an initiative planned by him.
The concept was further explored in Iron Man 2, with the introduction of Natasha Romanoff. The team was eventually established 
in the crossover style film The Avengers, which, followed by Avengers: Age of Ultron, Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame, 
established a series of four films that headlined the MCU and became the fourth highest-grossing film series of all time, with the MCU 
franchise overall ranking first. Arranged as an ensemble of core MCU characters such as Iron Man, Captain America and Thor, they are 
central to the MCU's Infinity Saga and have been acclaimed as an important part of the franchise.
In the mid 2000s, Kevin Feige realized that Marvel still owned the rights to the core members of the Avengers. Feige, a self-professed 
"fanboy", envisioned creating a shared universe just as creators Stan Lee and Jack Kirby had done with their comic books in the early 
1960s.
Ideas for a film based on the Avengers began in 2003, with Avi Arad, the CEO of Marvel Studios, first announcing plans to develop 
the film in April 2005, after Marvel Enterprises declared independence by allying with Merrill Lynch to produce a slate of films that would 
be distributed by Paramount Pictures.Marvel discussed their plans in a brief presentation to Wall Street analysts; the studio's 
intention was to release individual films for the main characterto establish their identities and familiarize audiences with thebefore 
merging the characters together in a crossover film. 
Screenwriter Zak Penn, who wrote The Incredible Hulk which introduced Hulk, became attached to the film in 2006 and was hired by
 Marvel Studios to write the film in June 2007. In the wake of the 2007008 Writers Guild of America strike, Marvel negotiated 
with the Writers Guild of America to ensure that it could create films based on its comic book counterparts, including Captain America, 
Ant-Man and The Avengers. After the successful release of Iron Man (2008) in May which introduced Iron Man, the company set a 
July 2011 release date for The Avengers. In September 2008, Marvel Studios reached an agreement with Paramounan extension of a
 previous partnership which gave the company distribution rights for five future Marvel films.
In October 2008, two major prospects occurred for Marvel Studios: Jon Favreau was brought in as an executive producer for the film,
 and the company signed a long-term lease with Raleigh Studios to produce three other big-budget filmsIron Man 2 introducing 
Black Widow, Thor introducing Thor; and cameo appearance of Hawkeye, Captain America: The First Avenger introducing Captain 
Americaat their Manhattan Beach, California complex. Executive producer Jon Favreau stated that he would not direct the film, 
but would "definitely have input and a say". Favreau also expressed concerns, stating, "It's going to be hard, because I was so involved 
in creating the world of Iron Man, and Iron Man is very much a tech-based hero, and then with Avengers you're going to be introducing 
some supernatural aspects because of Thor  the two of those works very well in the comic books, but it's going to take a lot of 
thoughtfulness to make that all work and not blow the reality that we've created". In March 2009, Marvel announced that the film's 
release date had been pushed back to May 4, 2012, almost a full year later.
In July 2009, Penn talked about the crossover process, stating, "My job is to kind of shuttle between the different movies and make 
sure that finally we're mimicking that comic book structure where all of these movies are connected. There's just a board that tracks 
'Here's where everything that happens in this movie overlaps with that movie'. I'm pushing them to do as many animatics as possible 
to animate the movie, to draw boards so that we're all working off the same visual ideas. But the exigencies 
of production take first priority".[14] At first, Penn tried to reduce Thor's role in the script because he had doubts about the 
character's ability to succeed on film. He changed his mind once Chris Hemsworth was cast as Thor. The film had always 
intended to use Loki as its villain, but Penn noted that early discussion had considered using Red Skull.
In January 2010, Marvel Studios chief Kevin Feige was asked if it would be difficult to meld the fantasy of Thor with the high-tech 
science fiction in Iron Man and The Avengers. "No," he said, "because we're doing the Jack Kirby/Stan Lee/Walt Simonson/J. 
Michael Straczynski Thor. We're not doing the blow-the-dust-off-of-the-old-Norse-book-in-your-library Thor. And in the Thor 
of the Marvel Universe, there's a race called the Asgardians. And we're linked through this Tree of Life that we're unaware of. 
It's real science, but we don't know about it yet. The 'Thor' movie is about teaching people that".[17] In March, it was reported 
that Penn had completed the first draft of the script, and that Marvel editor-in-chief Joe Quesada and Avengers comic-book 
writer Brian Michael Bendis had received copies.[18] Numerous aspects and elements of both the Ultimates and the Earth-616 
Avengers were utilized for the look and storyline of the 2012 live action film Marvel's The Avengers,[19] which was huge success
 and introduced the assembled team of Avengers.
The Avengers play a central role in the Marvel Cinematic Universe's Infinity Saga, being the focus in multiple feature films, 
beginning with the eponymous 2012 live-action film, The Avengers, and followed by the sequels Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015), 
Avengers: Infinity War (2018), and Avengers: Endgame (2019), the latter two of which were based on "The Infinity Gauntlet" storyline. 
The Avengers were featured in Captain America: Civil War (2016), which was loosely based on the "Civil War" storyline. They also 
appeared in the mid-credits scene of Captain Marvel (2019), set immediately after Infinity War and before Endgame.
In 1995, the Avengers Initiative is created by S.H.I.E.L.D. director Nick Fury, who envisions a group of heroes working together in 
response to planetary threats, following the appearance of superhumans such as Carol Danvers, who is imbued with the power 
of the Tesseract. He names his plan after her U.S. Air Force callsign, "Avenger". Years later, Fury assesses various individuals for 
the initiative, including Tony Stark and Steve Rogers. Stark's membership is declined after a negative report on his suitability by 
Natasha Romanoff. The World Security Council expresses a desire for Emil Blonsky to join the initiative, although they abandon 
their wish after Stark deters Thaddeus Ross from the idea.
In 2012, the Asgardian Loki teleports to the Joint Dark Energy Mission Facility on Earth, where he steals the Tesseract and 
brainwashes Clint Barton and Dr. Erik Selvig using his scepter. Following the attack, Fury recruits scientists Stark and Dr. Bruce 
Banner to locate the Tesseract. Stark and Rogers apprehend Loki, but are disrupted by the arrival of Thor, who demands Loki. 
This leads to arguments between the heroes, exacerbated by the revelation that S.H.I.E.L.D. is building weapons of mass 
destruction using the Tesseract, during which the brainwashed Barton attacks the Avengers' Helicarrier, provoking Banner 
to transform into the Hulk and go on a rampage.
After Loki kills S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Phil Coulson, the team unite to take revenge. With Barton coming to his senses, 
the Avengers confront Loki in New York City, who subsequently opens a portal on Stark Tower using the Tesseract 
and begins his invasion, with the Avengers (led by Rogers) fighting his Chitauri army. During the battle, the World 
Security Council launches a nuclear strike toward Manhattan against Fury's wishes, but the missile is intercepted by Stark, 
who flies it through the portal and destroys the Chitauri mother ship, deactivating the Chitauri army. Romanoff uses Loki's 
scepter to close the portal, and Loki is apprehended and taken to Asgard. The Avengers also unite to eat shawarma in the 
aftermath of the battle, while Stark Tower is renamed "Avengers Tower".
Three years after his attack on New York City, Loki's scepter, formerly in the possession of S.H.I.E.L.D., is used by Hydra 
following the collapse of S.H.I.E.L.D., causing the Avengers to track it down to the Eastern European nation of Sokovia, 
where they fight to recover it, also encountering the superhuman Hydra test subjects Wanda and Pietro Maximoff. Barton 
is wounded in the battle, whilst Rogers captures Hydra's leader Wolfgang von Strucker and Stark manages to retrieve the 
scepter despite being subjected to apocalyptic hallucinations by Wanda Maximoff's telepathy. Stark and Banner decide to 
use the scepter to create the Ultron Program as an imagined artificial intelligence peacekeeping force. Meanwhile, the Avengers 
celebrate their victory and try to lift Mjolnir as a game with nobody able to lift the hammer (except for a small nudge by Rogers, 
to Thor's surprise). However, the newly designed A.I. attacks the Avengers as Ultron, intent on destroying the Avengers, and
 later kills von Strucker. Stark earns the anger of Thor and Rogers for his creation, although he warns of a bigger impending cosmic threat.
In Africa, the Avengers confront Ultron, now allied with the Maximoff twins, and a fight ensues. Wanda induces telekinetic 
hallucinations upon the Avengers, and triggers Banner's transformation into the Hulk before being stopped by Barton. 
The Hulk rampages through Johannesburg until being stopped by Stark in his Hulkbuster armor. After regrouping and 
encountering Nick Fury at Clint Barton's farmhouse, Rogers, Barton and Romanoff retrieve a new vibranium body created 
by Ultron. Stark and Banner upload J.A.R.V.I.S. into the body, although they face resistance from Rogers and the Maximoffs. 
Thor, having experienced a vision of the Infinity Stones, uses Mjolnir to supercharge the process, creating The Vision.
With Ultron trying to cause an extinction event by using Sokovia as a meteor, the Avengers, joined by James Rhodes and 
the Maximoffs, defeat Ultron's sentries, with Pietro Maximoff killed whilst protecting Clint Barton, and with Sokovia destroyed 
to prevent human extinction. Vision eventually destroys the last remaining body of Ultron. In the aftermath of the battle, 
Stark decides to retire as an active member of the team; Banner and Thor go to space; while Rhodes, Sam Wilson, Maximoff, 
and the Vision join the team. The Avengers also move to the new Avengers Compound in Upstate New York as their primary headquarters.
A year after the Battle of Sokovia, the New Avengers Facility becomes the target of a heist, with a skirmish between 
Sam Wilson / Falcon and Scott Lang / Ant-Man. Months later, Rogers, Romanoff, Maximoff and Wilson defend a research 
lab in Lagos from Brock Rumlow. The Avengers successfully stop Rumlow and his crew of mercenaries, but when an 
attempted suicide attack by Rumlow is deflected by Maximoff through telekinesis, Wakandan diplomats are killed. As a result, 
Secretary of State Thaddeus Ross presents the Sokovia Accords to the Avengers, a United Nations legislation that would bring 
the Avengers and other superhumans under the direct authority of the UN. Although Stark, Rhodes, Vision and Romanoff 
support the idea, Rogers and Wilson object due to fears of their autonomy being limited.
After Bucky Barnes is accused of killing King T'Chaka of Wakanda in an explosion, Rogers and Wilson seek to protect 
him from an arrest warrant, causing them to clash with Stark, Rhodes, Romanoff and T'Challa, son of T'Chaka. After Barnes 
is detained in Berlin, Helmut Zemo activates his 'Winter Soldier' alter-ego using the Winter Soldier Book, although Barnes 
later comes to his senses and reveals Zemo's interest in the Winter Soldier Program. To assist them, Wilson recruits Scott 
Lang and Rogers recruits Clint Barton, who confronts the Vision and takes Maximoff out of de facto house arrest at the 
Avengers Compound. The two sides of the Avengers then confront at the Leipzig/Halle Airport, with Rogers, Barnes, 
Wilson, Barton, Lang and Maximoff facing Stark, Rhodes, Romanoff, the Vision, T'Challa and new recruit Peter Parker. 
Rogers and Barnes manage to escape with Romanoff's help, while their teammates are imprisoned in the Raft. Rhodes' 
legs are paralyzed when he is accidentally struck by a blast from the Vision that was aimed at Wilson. Rogers and Barnes 
head to the Hydra Siberian Facility to stop Zemo from reactivating the Winter Soldier Program, and are joined by Stark. 
However, Zemo shows Stark footage of Barnes' assassination of Stark's parents, turning Stark against Rogers and Barnes. 
In the ensuing fight, Rogers disables Stark's armor, whilst Barnes' cybernetic arm is destroyed and Rogers abandons his shield. 
Meanwhile, T'Challa apprehends Zemo after discovering he was his father's true killer. Rogers later breaks out his teammates 
from the Raft with the help of Romanoff arriving on a Quinjet,[c] with Stark declining to stop him.
Aftermath
Further information: Spider-Man: Homecoming and Ant-Man and the Wasp
Although officially reduced to just Stark, Vision and Rhodes, the Avengers continue operating. Stark sells Avengers Tower, 
with the Avengers relocating to the Avengers Compound in Upstate New York. Parker is offered a place on the Avengers roster 
by Stark after defeating Adrian Toomes, although he declines, choosing to remain a neighborhood superhero. Meanwhile, 
Barton and Lang make a deal with the U.S. government to be placed under house arrest so they can go back to their families.[d] 
The FBI, led by Jimmy Woo, monitor Lang's house arrest, which he violates due to Hope van Dyne and Hank Pym requiring his 
help to find Janet Van Dyne who has been trapped in the Quantum Realm.
In 2018, the Avengers face a new threat in the form of Thanos and his children, who are seeking the six Infinity Stones. Banner, 
defeated as the Hulk by Thanos aboard the Statesman, informs Dr. Stephen Strange, the keeper of the Time Stone, of Thanos' 
impending arrival. Strange and Banner, joined by Peter Parker and Tony Stark, confront Ebony Maw and Cull Obsidian in 
Greenwich Village. With the Hulk reluctant to emerge after his last beating at Thanos's hands, Strange is captured by Maw, 
while Banner contacts his former teammates to warn them of Thanos' intention to acquire Vision's Mind Stone.
Battle of Titan
Stark and Parker pursue Maw to space, rescuing Strange and killing Maw. On Stark's urging, they head for Thanos' home 
planet Titan, where they ally with the Guardians of the Galaxy after initial hostility. Despite Thanos now wielding four of the 
Infinity Stones, the Avengers and Guardians are able to restrain Thanos and attempt to take the Infinity Gauntlet, wielding 
the stones, off him. However, an enraged Peter Quill attacks Thanos upon learning of the death of Gamora, allowing Thanos 
to escape the heroes' grasp. After a fight between Thanos and Stark, in which Stark is stabbed, Strange surrenders the Time 
Stone to spare his life, contradicting his previous promise not to.
Battle of Wakanda
Meanwhile, Rogers, Romanoff and Wilson, fugitives since 2016, intercept an attack on Vision and Maximoff in Edinburgh. 
They return to the Avengers Compound, where they reunite with Rhodes and Banner. Learning of the threat Thanos could 
pose, the Vision proposes to be destroyed to prevent Thanos from acquiring the Mind Stone, but the Avengers refuse and 
travel to Wakanda, where Shuri, sister of T'Challa, begins an operation to remove the Stone from the Vision. Meanwhile, the 
Wakandan army, the Jabari Tribe, the Dora Milaje, and Bucky Barnes all join the Avengers to defend the Vision from Thanos' 
children and the Outriders. Banner, unable to become the Hulk, dons a modified Hulkbuster armor, whilst Thor, Rocket and 
Groot also arrive in Wakanda and join the battle, with Thor wielding his newly forged axe hammer Stormbreaker.
Eventually, the Children of Thanos ambush Shuri, stopping her from operating on the Vision. This prompts the Vision to 
enter the battlefield, where he urges Wanda Maximoff to use her telekinetic powers to destroy the Mind Stone. After 
Maximoff tearfully does so, killing Vision, Thanos uses the Time Stone to reverse the action and retrieves the Mind Stone 
from Vision's forehead, killing him once more. With the Gauntlet now assembled, Thanos, despite being attacked by Thor, 
initiates the Blip, causing Wilson, Barnes, Maximoff, Strange, Parker, T'Challa, Groot, Quill, Drax, and Mantis to disintegrate, 
leaving Stark and Nebula alone on Titan while the surviving Avengers in Wakanda rue their defeat after Thanos retreats.
Reversing the Blip
Further information: Avengers: Endgame
Three weeks later, the Avengers regroup after Stark and Nebula are rescued from space by Carol Danvers. Following 
an outburst from Stark towards Rogers over not supporting him on Titan, the rest of the Avengers detect an energy 
surge from Thanos' Garden planet, and head there to ambush him. There, Thanos reveals that he had destroyed the 
Infinity Stones, prompting an enraged Thor to behead him.
During the next five years, Romanoff becomes the leader of the Avengers, Rogers becomes a grief counsellor, 
while Stark retires to live with his wife Pepper Potts and daughter Morgan. Barton, with his family having fallen 
victim to the Blip, becomes a criminal-hunting vigilante, whilst Thor, overcome by depression, becomes an 
overweight alcoholic. Banner, on the other hand, merges his personalities, retaining his intelligence in the Hulk's body.
Time Heist
Following the release of a trapped Scott Lang from the Quantum Realm, Lang visits Rogers and Romanoff and explains 
that he only experienced five hours in the Realm rather than five years, and thus suggests time travel as a method of 
reversing the Blip. Lang, Rogers and Romanoff visit Stark and Banner to discuss the plan, with Banner running unsuccessful 
time travel tests on Lang using Hank Pym's quantum tunnel. Following this, the initially reluctant Stark, remembering the 
loss of Peter Parker, helps the team develop successful time travel using Pym Particles, with the Avengers conducting an 
operation dubbed by Lang as the 'Time Heist'.
Banner, Rogers, Stark and Lang travel to New York City in 2012, with Banner being given the Time Stone by the Ancient 
One after revealing Strange's surrender of it, whilst Stark and Rogers retrieve the Space Stone from the 1970s after failing 
to retrieve it from 2012. Thor and Rocket retrieve the Reality Stone and Mjolnir from Asgard in 2013. With Rhodes and 
Nebula retrieving the Power Stone from Morag in 2014, Nebula is captured by a past Thanos and replaced with her past 
self. The Soul Stone is also retrieved by Barton following Romanoff sacrificing herself on Vormir to obtain it.
Reuniting in the present, the Avengers place the Stones into a gauntlet designed by Stark, Banner, and Rocket. Banner, 
having the most resistance to their gamma radiation, wields the gauntlet and reverses the Blip. Meanwhile, 2014-Nebula, 
impersonating her future self, uses the time machine to transport 2014-Thanos and his warship to the present, destroying 
the Avengers Compound in the process. Present-day Nebula convinces 2014-Gamora to betray Thanos, but is unable to 
convince 2014-Nebula and kills her. Thanos overpowers Stark, Thor, and Rogers, who wields Mjolnir to Thor's approval. 
Thanos summons his army to retrieve the Stones, intent on using them to destroy the universe and create a new one. 
A restored Dr. Stephen Strange arrives with other sorcerers, the restored Avengers and Guardians of the Galaxy, the Ravagers, 
and the armies of Wakanda and Asgard to fight Thanos' army. Carol Danvers also arrives and destroys Thanos' warship, 
but Thanos overpowers her and seizes the gauntlet. After a prompt from Strange, Stark obtains the Stones and uses them 
to disintegrate Thanos and his army, but the strain of using them kills him.
Following Stark's funeral, Thor appoints Valkyrie as the new ruler of New Asgard and heads for space with the Guardians. 
Rogers returns the Stones and Mjolnir to their proper timelines and remains in the past to live with Peggy Carter. 
In the present, an elderly Rogers passes his shield to Sam Wilson, retiring as an Avenger. Maximoff begins living in 
a magically-altered town of Westview, New Jersey, to deal with her grief from Vision's death, which eventually reveals the 
origin of her power as the Scarlet Witch. Meanwhile, Rhodes and Wilson return to the U.S. military. Eventually, Wilson accepts 
Rogers' legacy and becomes the new Captain America. Parker returns to school and goes on a school trip across Europe with 
his classmates. Parker also inherits an artificial intelligence from Stark that allows him control over a fleet of Stark Industries' 
orbital drones weaponry. It sets Parker into conflict with Mysterio, who is a former Stark employee, which resulted in his identity
 being revealed to the public. Danvers and Banner remain in contact and they answer Wong's call to discuss the origin of 
Shang-Chi's Ten Rings.[24]
In an alternate 2011, a vengeful Hank Pym eliminates the Avengers' candidates: Stark, Thor, Barton, Banner, and Romanoff. 
After Pym is defeated, Loki uses the opportunity to invade Earth. Meanwhile, Fury quietly prepares to reactivate the team 
after Rogers is discovered in the Arctic and Danvers responds to his call for help. Rogers, Danvers, and Fury later battle Loki 
and his Asgardian army aboard a Helicarrier. During the fight, the Watcher brings in a variant of Romanoff from a universe 
that was wiped out by Ultron, and she incapacitates Loki with his own scepter before being greeted by Fury.